Today we are on a very tight schedule
and I'm still going to get a good
session in. And if you guys follow my
principles, you'll understand how to get
a very effective session in a very short
amount of time. Now, we're doing chest.
I shouldn't say chest. If I was a
bodybuilder, I'd say chest, but I'm
doing bench press is the priority. So,
that's uh something you can take home.
The difference between a bodybuilder's
programming focus and a strength
athletes programming focus is a
bodybuilder's programming focus is
muscle specific and a strength athletes
training focus is movement specific. So
today's uh pushpull uh in particular I'm
going to be doing bench press with pull
downs as well as arms. So it's a two-day
program at the moment on the weekend. So
this is a funny one. It's a little bit
messy to be honest with you. And I've
been instructed by one of my training
partners to go easy today so we can have
more fun on Saturday, but you guys do
the maths, right? So, Saturday and
Wednesday is my training days for bench,
which is not set out very correctly cuz
it's like I've only got two days rest.
Saturday is going to be four days rest
and then here it's two days rest. So, it
doesn't really add up, right? So
therefore, this session, I've got to
train for it to be stimulating, but not
so hard that it interferes with the
great session on Saturday.
What do I do? What do I do? Do I betray
my team
and just perform well today or do I go
conservative so that on Saturday I can
be performing at a high level? Now,
here's the thing.
You might be asking, why don't you just
perform well twice?
Some people can, but I typically respond
very well with a heavy session and a
light session
because it's also because I'm at a level
now where I'm lifting quite heavy. So,
if you've been following, I posted on my
Instagram page that last Saturday I
bench pressed 210 kilograms,
which I'm very, very happy about. I'll
tell you why I'm happy. Because for
weeks, it was kind of like that was the
goal for the last program, but I didn't
end up doing it because I started
noticing that my pecs were sore.
They were sore because I was benching
pretty heavy two times a week, right?
And that's the negatives. Once you start
getting strong enough, your body needs
more recovery than that. So that's why
the perfect blend of a heavy session, a
light session is uh favorable. So I
hadn't been going heavy heavy. And I was
due to do my 210, but just didn't do it
cuz it's like I know that feeling in my
pec. It's kind of like telling me that
if I go heavy today, I'm not going to be
happy with the outcome. I don't want to
say peck there, but anyway, I said it.
That's what I was avoiding. But either
way, I did the 210 on the weekend and
there was zero pain. So, I'm very, very
happy with that. My heavy sessions have
been requested by my team, the cream
team.
That's what they call them. That's what
we call ourselves, the cream team. So,
if you're following, that's me, Vasa,
and Ree.
and we've been doing our sessions
together on Saturday
and that's over on our last session was
on the cult strength page.
But maybe cuz my videographer wasn't
available that day. Very upsetting.
Very upsetting. Maybe he's available
this Saturday. No, he's ah who doesn't
work on the weekends, man. Anyway,
whatever. Whatever. He's working just
not for me. He's working for his other
favorite people, the people that he
actually likes. Anyway, anyway, so
that's what's happening. So this
Saturday's session, if you want to see
my Saturday session, that's going to be
on Thank you, brother. That's going to
be on cold strength page. Don't give
that guy a follow. That's little Reesei.
I We didn't figure it out yet. I was
either one, two, or three. We didn't
know. Depends on how you judge it. I'm
definitely not the strongest. I like
that though. How's that? Like I'm a
pretty good bencher. 210 kg is what I
did on the weekend. My best is 250, but
I'm the weakest in the team. Have you
heard the saying, if you're the
strongest in the room, you're in the
wrong room. Yeah. Well, therefore, I
must be in the right room
cuz my training partners are stronger
than me. Anyway,
today is my light day.
Well, it's supposed to be my light day,
but logistically
logistically it just it's not sitting
right with me because because no matter
what I do, it's going to interfere. here
with my performance on Saturday because
it's not enough rest. So if I go too
light,
if I go too light, it's not even like if
I go light enough that it doesn't
interfere with Saturday, is it
stimulating enough for me to move
forward? Maybe not. That's my dilemma.
So what I might do,
I know you're thinking, "This guy's
overthinking like a mofo."
What I might do is just see how it goes.
Maybe this session will be my heavier
session,
which isn't going to be one rep max.
The plan was to do my heavy session is
going to be a 3x3 and then the light
session is going to be a high rep.
Um, so maybe today will be my 3x3. What
could I do for 3x3?
What do you think I can do for 3x3?
180. You're not wrong. I can do 190.
Actually, I did that a few weeks ago,
but I did two sets of three on 190. We
have it on the channel. Yeah, we have it
on the channel. I did two sets of three
at 190. So, technically, I should be
able to do more than that.
But just because you you can doesn't
mean you should. Do you know what I'm
saying? Sometimes you've got to cuz this
is kind of like the start of the new
block. So, do you know my rules with
starting a new block? Start conservative
to allow room to progress. So maybe
Musty, you're right. Maybe 185 is a good
number. So we go over a four-week block,
we go 3x3 on 185, then 190, then 195,
and then see how that sets us up for
success on week four, which would be 200
kg. So do you know what I do for my D
losses? So my D load strategy is to
maintain the progression. So maintain
the load but
reduce the volume by cutting the total
amount of sets in half or sometimes even
more. So if this was the case I'd be
doing something like you know 185 today
for 3x3. I think that's a nice uh start
and then I finish on 200 kg for one set
of three. That's my D lo. So I still go
heavy right? And if I get 200 for three
because um uh when was it? Two weeks ago
I got 200 for two which I was very happy
about. So, if I can move that to 200 for
three
on week four. Do you see how we're kind
of, you know, like we're saving room for
progression? So, 185 for three. I
already did 190 for three a few weeks
ago, like a month ago. You guys have
seen it if you're following. But it's
not about today's session. It's about
setting myself up for four weeks time to
hit my 200 kg for three reps. If I hit
200 kg for three reps, critter, what
does that make me? It makes me strong.
It makes me strong. Hey, check out
Critter. So, this guy, he's not miked up
so you can't hear him, but Critter is
one of the coaches here at Strength
System. Now, he was the first Australian
to total 10 times body weight. Is that
right? And he's done that twice. So,
sorry, in two weight classes, I should
say. He's done it multiple times in two
weight classes. So, um the heaviest
weight class was a 75 kilo class. You
did what was your best total? Was it 750
on the dot or 767?
767 in the 75 class. That's outstanding.
So in the 75 class, so what's your
squat? Best squat in 75 was 307. So
that's more than four times body weight.
What was your best deadlift in 75? In
competition it was 300. So four times
body weight, deadlift, four times body
weight, squat and bench.
Bench was
at pro was under 80. You done you've
done 180 kg. So it's well over. So you
all you have to do is like bench press
160 to double body weight and you're
doing 180.
That's pretty strong,
don't you think? Anyway, stronger than
me. He's actually when I got um when I
thought I was really good and strong and
I came and set my first Australian
record, um I thought I was best lifter
for the day and I waited behind um for
the awards cuz I was like, "Oh, I came
first in the 90 class back then." And I
was like, "Oh, I may as well wait and
pick up my award for best lifter." And
they're like, "Ah." And the best lift
award goes to Critter. And I'm like, who
the f is Critter?
Anyway, it was this guy. He beat me. Um,
so whatever. Still remember that? Of
course. I can't forget that. Why would
I? The day before. What What happened
the day before? So you came in for the
weight for the way in, right? Yeah. Not
watching you. Yeah. Yeah. But I was in
We're all there in the sauners and
jumping on the scales and all that
stuff. I was like, "Oh, that's
Sebastian." Yeah. Isn't that funny? cuz
you were kind of like new in the scene.
Never done it. Yeah. Right. And then you
just come in and just take the [__]
title. I was trained obviously, but but
you'd never really competed or anything.
You just come in for a bit of fun. Just
come and just beat bruise everyone's
egos and leave. Isn't that nice of him?
Lovely fella. Anyway, he's going to be
unrackcking me for today. So, let's um I
do Can you unack me for this, please?
It's light, but can you please just
unrackck me? Um, so what we'll do, so if
you guys have been following, you know
that I like to calibrate. So of course
he knows how to unrackck, but it's kind
of new every time you unrackcking for a
new person. Okay, on my breath,
lovely one,
critter, lovely one. What's that?
Different than Yeah, for sure. Critter
is uh That's the first time you've
unragged for me, isn't it? Yep. Feeling
good. Feeling good. I teach a few
different rules with it. But it's okay.
It works. It works. Uh we're going to go
like this. 125, 145, 165, 185.
Sounds a bit logical, doesn't it?
Yeah. Yeah. So, how many reps did I just
do? Three. Something like that. So, my
warm-ups. So, this is for you guys at
home. We were talking about warm-ups
before, and um something that a lot of
people do with their warm-ups is they
just do it wrong. So, there's a lot of
things that people do wrong with their
warm-ups. But, I'll tell you what I like
to do is I like to choose my logical
incremental increases. Here, it's like
20 kg. Um 20 kg jumps.
But I'm also quite strong. So, 20 kg
jumps would be quite a lot. If you're
benching like 100 kg, don't do 20 kilo
jumps,
right? But I'm benching the goal today
is 185 kg. Um, so what I like to do is
20 kilo jumps. And people are like, is
it is it fatiguing to do a lot of sets?
Well, this is how I do it. So for like I
did warm-ups on dumbbells and then I get
to, you know, my first weight here, 60
kilos. I don't know how many I did.
Maybe eight or 10, you know, then 80 kg,
five, I just did three. So then I'll
just do one, one, one, one.
Do you know what I'm saying? So, so 125,
I'll just do one just to feel it. It's
like I'm warm at this point. It's not
about warming up anymore. It's about
teaching my body to accept the weight
that I'm about to hold. So, let's do
that again.
I said I said one, but I ended up doing
two. Anyway, the next one I'll do I'll
do one. So, 125
145. So, three more sets before I'm on.
[Music]
Yeah. Well, what it was actually it was
too light to just do one rep. That
wouldn't have felt like anything
actually. I still need ah legend. Thank
you, brother. I need some type of
stimulation.
Now I'll do singles.
Good one.
Cool. 65 85. Good. Good.
He said, "How is that?" Better, you
know, it's just good. Like, you know, a
good bencher understands the importance
of a good unrackck. Pop my cherry. Pop
my cherry with with each other. Yeah.
So, that's the thing. You got to you got
to calibrate.
You got to calibrate. You know, I know a
lot of people when they train, it's just
like they ask anyone who's in the gym,
hey, can you spot me? can you unrackck
mep me? And it's like I could never do
that. You are playing to a certain
degree to a certain degree. Like if
you're lifting 100 kilograms and under
as a as a guy my size, like body weight
and all that stuff, so it doesn't really
matter. But when you get to a certain
level, it's it makes a big difference.
It makes a big difference. When I'm
unrackcking for myself with these
weights, to be honest with you, this is
probably the heaviest that I would do. I
wouldn't go above this anymore. I used
to bench press. I used to unrackck over
200 kg and it was okay. But now
it it takes it takes me out of position.
So So let's talk about position that I
want to be in for my bench press. I need
to have my shoulder blades.
So watch this back and down. So I'm
arching my upper back. So the way that I
like to think about my bench press, my
shoulder position in a bench press is
the bottom position of a lat pull down.
So this is how I teach people. Imagine
you're doing a lat pull down. So grab it
from here, shoulder blades back and down
with your chest up high. That's the
that's the chest and shoulder position,
which is this, right? I know it looks
silly. Then from here, arms in front.
That's the position that I like to
teach. Now, here's the thing with the
unrackck. To unrackck a heavy weight,
you kind of need to
use your pecs and and kind of push with
your whole shoulder, which takes your
shoulder blades out of position. So, the
unrackcker allows you to just push with
your elbows,
right? While you focus on keeping the
shoulders in position. Now, when I'm
unrackcking by myself, it's almost
impossible for me to unrackck the weight
by myself and keep my shoulders back.
Now, some people say, "Well, just put
them back when you're in position."
Yeah, that's all good and well except
for when you have a big weight in your
hand like for me 185 kg. Once I protract
to unrackck that weight because the
weight's so heavy in my hand, I can no
longer retract because the bench that
I'm laying on is restricting my shoulder
blades from being able to move freely in
that position. Right? So that's why and
I always recommend it. Now when I was
younger, I thought that it didn't matter
because I was able to do it. But now I
teach the importance of using an
unrackcker if you want to get the
absolute most out of your bench press so
that you can maintain that position from
start to finish.
All right, 165. One rep. I'm going to
put some chalk cuz that barbell feels a
bit slippery.
I definitely should.
Come on. Come on.
Lovely. Thank you.
You know, there's a sequence, right?
I'll tell you sometimes what I like to
do. This is silly. I like to do
everything like load the plates and all
that. then I can sit down and enjoy. Do
you know what I mean? Because otherwise,
if I'm doing this, I still have work to
do. I can't enjoy it. But anyway, look
at my [__] training partner. Excuse
my language. He's doing all of the all
the hard work. Thank you, bro. Thank
you, bro. I can be selfish.
Um, I love recording for this reason.
Interestingly, it doesn't feel like it
kind of feels heavy in my hands. I'm a
bit tired. All of that stuff, whatever.
Not an excuse like that. It's just like
sometimes it just doesn't feel awesome.
So, you do it. It's like, oh, do I have
the top set? And then I come back to
look at it. And I'm sure you guys will
agree that moved very much like how the
first warm first warm-up set moved. it
looked like um there was not much weight
on the bar, which gives me a whole bunch
of confidence to come into the top set
and say, "Of course, when you move 165
like that, three reps on 185, of course
you'll get that." So, now I'm going to
get my game face on. We'll go for our
top set in about I'll wait 5 minutes
after that.
That felt
interestingly hard. But then I was
feeling the speed of it going,
"Yeah." How's that? Like I I felt like
like on completion of the third rep, it
was like
I think that was good.
Yeah, we'll do two more sets of that.
It was so bad.
Happy. Happy. All right, two more sets.
How much time have I got?
I got to do a presentation in an hour
and 9 minutes.
So,
hey, seven minutes. Yeah. No, to do two
more sets of this and then do my arms as
well. Yes, I can. So, this will be
finished. So, I'm going to be doing 8
minute rest between sets. Um,
and then
so that means, you know, 16 more minutes
to finish this and then I've got just an
arm day. So, just arm pump. And I will
tell you now, I will tell you now, this
is going to interfere with my
performance on Saturday. So, I'm going
to let the the cream team down. And
while they're doing heavy,
I'm just going to be doing my light day,
which will be light lighter loads. I'll
still be working hard, but it'll be more
of like a um I guess a hypertrophy
stimulus. This is um my current
situation is my legs. If you've been
following ah my last session ended quite
abruptly. Uh so what happened was I felt
my quadricep twinging during my
deadlift. So, if you guys remember, I
tore my quadricep. It was a very mild
tear. Um, but I tore my quadricep doing
a squat. Same weight, 270 kg. Uh, it was
the second rep, and I felt it go pop.
Um, damn it. Anyhow, so during that
time, I thought, all right, now's a
great opportunity to work my deadlifts.
So, I came back with stifflegged
deadlifts to take the quadriceps out of
the equation. And then I thought, right,
so now my quadriceps slowly slowly
getting better. I'm going to add
deadlift deficit. So the more the bigger
the deficit, the more you have to bend
your knees, the more quadriceps you use.
So that was like intentional. It was
like I want to load my quadriceps with a
with something that's not as quadricepy
as a squat. Anyhow, pause deficit
deadlifts. Got the first rep, which
actually looked pretty good. And then
the second rep, I didn't say anything on
the camera because I'm like, "No, be
positive. It's okay. It's fine." But
then I was just sitting there just
going, "Yeah, I I um I heard it again."
So, the good news is I didn't hurt it
that badly, but it was badly enough to
know that I was bringing my big heavy
heavy quadricep work in too soon and I
need to be a little bit more sensible.
Um, so you know, this was actually a
week ago from today. So, what I'm doing
is uh just very very light hypertrophy
work for my lower body now. And I think,
you know, all that needs to be done is
like a few weeks of light work just so I
don't reinjure myself. Either way, the
beauty of this is I can focus on bench
press now, but I don't want to be silly
with it. I don't want to say, "Oh, I,
you know, I can just push push push the
bench press forward." You know, it's
just not going to interfere with my
bench press, but I still need to be
smart about it. So, today's the heavy
day. Saturday with the cream team, I'm
just going to have to use that as my
hypertrophy session. Okay, couple more
minutes. Get my game face on. Focus. Set
number two.
I I pushed it in the wrong groove in the
second rep. Where did that get caught?
It didn't get caught. I just misgrooved
it. Did you see it went slow on the
second rep? Yeah. Yeah. No, I saw that
went forward. Yeah. But it wasn't hard.
This the first rep flew. Yeah. I was
like, "Yes." And then the second went
like off, but then uh I knew it wasn't
hard.
But it's all good. We got there.
Easy.
That easy.
What the [__] happened?
Good one. That was the easiest set. How
funny. Thank you, bro. Thank you, bro.
Yeah, I agree. I agree. Thanks.
Thanks, man. 585.
That's my homie. I forgot about that
like a couple years ago. I didn't forget
about him. That's my homie.
Yeah, he was watching in the mirror. I
know he was. I know he was. He's got my
back, bro.
You know, when you were off in Turkey
and Quiddle was back in Melbourne, you
know, and James was doing CrossFit at
the CrossFit gym, you know. My homie was
here. My homie was here.
Where were you? Huh? All right. Now,
next up,
I'm going to do a bit of uh Thank you,
bro. I'm going to do some arm work. Now,
this is just easy. I'm really happy with
that. 3x3 on 185. Um I could have easily
done 190 for 3x3.
Um which is nice. That's what I like to
do. It's like you think of a number you
can do on day one, save that for next
week and do, you know, like 5 kg or 5%,
whatever it is. Do lighter than that on
week one. So, that's the strategy. Think
of what you can do on week one. Save
that for week two. Week one, let's go 5
kg lighter or whatever it is. Do one
increment lighter. How's that going to
look? Of course, it's going to be easy.
See, I made an error. I misgrooved the
second rep. And then what did I do for
the third rep? I got it easily because
the weight was conservative, right? So
that's why you start conservative. You
allow room for little errors. You allow
room for progression the following week.
So, I think today I could have done 190,
but I didn't. I did 185. So, therefore,
do I think next week I'll do 190? Of
course, I could have done it this week.
So, what do you think 190 is going to
look like next week? So, after today,
you know, I should get some type of a
training effect, some type of stimulus,
and then next week 190 hopefully will
look like that. Now, I've got two great
weeks of progression and then I have a
lot of confidence to come in on week
three and hit 195 for 3x3. In theory,
we're going to see. Now, if I hit 3x3 on
195, do you think it's possible that I
get one set of three on 200? You know,
of course, that sounds logical. It
sounds like I can. Of course, anything
can happen. And I'm not going to
underestimate what 300 for three is, but
that's how I think about my four-weekly
progression. And if you apply that to
your training,
it's just logical. It's putting you in a
position to be able to apply the
principle of progressive overload. So, a
lot of people come in and this is like,
week one, train as hard as I can. Let's
just say I did that. Here, I trained as
hard as I could on week one. Um, what do
you think I could get? Like, I do the
first set of 190. And this is what a lot
of people do. 190. Yeah, I got it. Why
don't I try 195 on on the second set
because I think I'll get that, too. And
then maybe you'll get it. Let's just say
I did that today. 190 on first set.
Easy. 195 on the second set. Maybe I got
it. And then on the third set, I missed
the third rep. Like that's kind of how a
lot of people look when they train.
That's not bad, but what do you do next
week? What do you do next week? It makes
it pretty hard to progress, right? As
well as you're pushing yourself to a
point where you're borderline failing
reps or, you know, you're going to come
in and just set yourself up for I know
I'm going to be grinding out. Like
today, I came in 185. I was pretty
confident. Uh and that was why. Anyway,
next up, arms. All right. My choice of
exercises for arms. I'm going to
superers set cables today. I feel like I
would like to just kind of take it a
little bit easier. I'm going to kind of
pump through this set because I've got
an appointment to go to. So, what I'm
going to do is alternate between
triceps
and biceps. So, tricep press downs,
bicep curls. Okay. You know, this is the
whole stack. Um, unfortunately, there's
not much that I can do about this. I've
got strong triceps. It's nice. But what
I'm going to do is a reprelated cycle.
So, um, you know, maybe I'll do sets of
10 today, next week sets of 11, next
week sets of 12 because I can't really
go heavier. This is the whole stack.
Okay, I lied. I did 15. Um, that was too
easy to do 10. um 15 I kind of felt like
that was challenging. So the thing is
with arms um you know upper body so
bench press big movements like that
taking it to fail is fatiguing. It's
hard to progress. Light movements like
arms taking it to fail you're fine. I
didn't take that to fail. Um
I'll do a couple of sets of it. Like
maybe the next set I'm going to do
minimal rest. I'm saving myself so that
I can do multiple sets of that with
minimal rest because I don't have time.
Not because I think minimal rest is a
good thing. I always think if in doubt,
rest for a little bit longer. Get a more
complete rest so that you get a better
recovery so that you can lift a heavier
weight. Even if your goal is
hypertrophy, a lot of people say for
hypertrophy, rest less because you kind
of want the fatigue because that's how
we increase mechanical tension.
Incorrect.
Even if your goal is hypertrophy, the
way you perform matters. If you've got
the option to rest for a little bit
longer, that's my recommendation every
single time. But for strength, the
performance absolutely does matter. The
amount of weight you lift is absolutely
crucial. So for strength, there's no
arguing. Everyone agrees that longer
rest is important. It's only for
hypertrophy where people say longer rest
uh shorter rest is better for
hypertrophy. I disagree. Performance
always matters. Longer rest for
hypertrophy allows you to lift heavier
weights and allows more mechanical
tension which is the main driver for
hypertrophy.
Don't
intentionally aim for fatigue. That's
not the goal. Aim for fatigue during the
set. So work as hard as you can to take
the movement close to fail, but then get
a full recovery so that we can do
another high quality set straight after
that. Okay. Next up, biceps.
My biceps aren't as strong as my
triceps. So,
let's see how we go.
Um, to be honest with you, no, they
don't right now. I don't need them. Um,
I only had it for the bench press. And
the wrist wraps also don't matter. I
just haven't really taken that off.
And now, the beauty of having them off
is you can see the arm pump, which is
also an important part of arm training,
is the flex in the mirror. Do you know
what I mean?
Okay.
Um, that felt really easy on the first
couple of reps. I will go heavier
because I don't really like doing 15s. I
did 15s on the tricep because it's very
easy. Um, so if I have a choice, I will
go heavier. So, um, let's go back to
same weight for triceps. Do another set
of 15. And on my next bicep set, I'm
going to go slightly heavier.
Nah, you know what? You don't even have
to watch this. Um, I'm going to do a few
more sets and then I'm done. So, YouTube
thinks that you should watch this video
next. Until next time, follow my
programming principles. This is the
stuff that's taken me so many years to
develop and learn. Either by learning
from academics and coaches or putting
myself under the barbell uh and
practicing all of these methods. I've
done so many things that don't work and
now I kind of just don't do them
anymore. I do the stuff that does work.
Uh hopefully you can see that with my
performance. I am quite strong and if
you want to do the techniques that I do,
I promise you you will succeed.
That one was [__] hard, bro.